Climate change produced by greater atmospheric CO$_2$ concentrations
\cite{kane_atmospheric_1996} from human activity has led to increased exposure
to hazards worldwide and domestically: increased storm severity, rising sea
levels, more extreme temperatures, hotter summers, and rising sea levels to name
a few \cite{reidmiller_fourth_2018}. Data from the Mauna Loa Observatory,
illustrated by Figure \ref{fig:mauna-loa-co2}, shows the long term upward trend
of surface level \ac{co2} concentration \cite{kane_atmospheric_1996}.
\begin{figure}[ht!]
    \centering
    \resizebox{0.9\columnwidth}{!}{\input{figures/01_introduction/mauna-loa-co2.pgf}}
    \caption{Monthly average \ac{co2} emissions measured at the Mauna Loa
    Observatory from 1985-2024 \cite{kane_atmospheric_1996}.}
    \label{fig:mauna-loa-co2}
\end{figure}

Without immediate action to reduce carbon emissions, these impacts will worsen
\cite{intergovernmental_panel_on_climate_change_climate_2014}. Specifically, it
is our societal dependence on fossil fuels to support our expansive economies
and energy systems that contributes the most to rising carbon dioxide levels
(along with other \acp{ghg}) \cite{epa_inventory_2023}. Figure
\ref{fig:emissions-by-sector} shows the \ac{co2eq} emissions by economic sector
in the United States \cite{epa_inventory_2023}. Figure
\ref{fig:emissions-by-source} shows the \ac{co2eq} lifecycle emissions by energy
source \cite{united_nations_economic_commission_for_europe_carbon_2022}. 

\begin{figure}[ht!]
    \centering
    \begin{subfigure}{0.7\columnwidth}
        \centering
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{figures/01_introduction/emissions-by-source.pgf}}
        \caption{Lifecycle \ac{co2eq} emissions by energy source.}
        \label{fig:emissions-by-source}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}{0.7\columnwidth}
        \centering
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{figures/01_introduction/emissions-by-sector.pgf}}
        \caption{Share of emissions from primary economic sectors.}
        \label{fig:emissions-by-sector}
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{Data from the U.S. EPA and the \ac{un} showing additional
    atmospheric \ac{co2} generated by human activity.}
\end{figure}
\FloatBarrier

Therefore, to achieve the almost universally shared goal of halting and
reversing the effects of climate change \cite{united_nations_paris_2015}, our
globalized society must transition away from fossil fuels to clean energy
technologies such as nuclear and renewable energy and switch our transportation
systems to electric or hydrogen powered vehicles
\cite{intergovernmental_panel_on_climate_change_climate_2021}. 

Naturally, the importance of modeling energy systems to gain insight and form
strategies to achieve this transition has grown. Especially since the spatial
and temporal complexities are also expected to grow with greater penetration of
\ac{vre}, such as solar and wind energy --- two energy sources that are
spatially diffuse and temporally challenging to predict. A class of tools called
\acp{esom} are the most common method for understanding our energy systems.
However, while climate change may be the most immediate existential threat to
society \cite{hickman_climate_2021}, it is a focusing issue that brings
challenges of equity and disproportional impacts to the fore. These latter
challenges have been always been concomitant with our energy system, but energy
system modeling has largely ignored the ways energy systems mediate
socio-political power alongside transporting electrons and fuel. For example,
fossil fueled power plants have always been associated with air pollution and
worsened health for nearby communities --- commonly poorer and black
communities, which are already marginalized, evincing a violation of fairness
and justice principles \cite{mohai_which_2015}. Studying these consequences of
our energy choices historically belonged to domain of the environmental justice
literature \cite{schlosberg_reconceiving_2004,mohai_environmental_2009} but has
developed further into the discipline of energy justice
\cite{sovacool_energy_2015}. 

The energy transition will require a great expansion of our energy
infrastructure to build replace fossil-fueled energy with clean energy and
additional transmission networks to carry electrons. Although the technology to
accomplish this transition is mature, there is still local public opposition to
many energy projects \cite{wolsink_wind_2007}. Particularly in empowered and
affluent communities \cite{stokes_prevalence_2023}. \acp{esom} cannot capture
these ``human dimensions'' of energy systems despite some awareness of their
importance \cite{pfenninger_energy_2014}. This is because they only optimize a
single objective --- cost (or some other aggregated economic metric). People
have and express preferences over many dimensions simultaneously. Further, even
in the absence of climate change, incorporating social context into the practice
of energy modeling remains beneficial since doing so will create substantively
better decisions \cite{wilsdon_see-through_2004}. The solution for enclosing
this feature of energy system design proposed in this thesis is two-fold. The
first is to develop an \ac{esom} capable of multi-objective optimization. The
benefits of multi-objective optimization have been understood for some time, yet
only recent advances in computing power have made them a practical method for
energy modeling. Hobbs (1995) wrote:

% \cite{hobbs_optimization_1995}.    
\begin{quote}
    \blockcquote[p.12]{hobbs_optimization_1995}{Multi-objective methods are more
    appropriately used to help people to understand the problem better, explore
    their feelings, form a coherent, defensible set of values, and understand
    the implications of those values for the decision. [...] In reality,
    people's values are often uncertain and incoherent. During the course of a
    planning exercise, people's attitudes will evolve in response to new
    information, interactions with other people, and viewing the problem from
    different perspectives}
\end{quote}

This leads to the second major contribution of this thesis, which is to validate
the multi-objective \ac{esom} developed herein by conducting a multiple-case
study in Illinois involving interviews with local energy planners,
decision-makers, and advocates throughout the state. Altogether, this work will
allow ``non-technical'' perspectives to be incorporated into a rigorous modeling
framework leading to greater perceptions of legitimacy through an iterative
articulation of values and priorities involving the public as key deliberators.
The result is a step towards a holistic integration of energy justice and energy
system engineering.

\section{Research Objectives}

This dissertation has three primary objectives. 
\begin{enumerate}
    \item Create an open-source tool that fills two major gaps in the energy
    modeling literature by enabling \acf{moo} and by facilitating open dialogue
    and thereby producing more just energy policies. This objective is supported
    by Chapter \ref{chapter:lit-review}, Chapter \ref{chapter:osier}, Chapter
    \ref{chapter:benchmark-results}, and Chapter \ref{chapter:examples}.
    \item Demonstrate the importance of participatory and deliberative processes
    for developing robust energy policy. This objective is supported by Chapter
    \ref{chapter:lit-review} and Chapter \ref{chapter:communities}
    \item Evaluate the role of energy modeling in decision-making processes and
    assess the the usability of the aforementioned tool from the perspective of
    energy planners, policymakers, and advocates in the state of Illinois. This
    objective is supported by Chapter \ref{chapter:communities}.
\end{enumerate}

Chapter \ref{chapter:lit-review} discusses the existing literature and work from
several spanning disciplines, including risk assessment, energy justice, and
energy system optimization. Chapter \ref{chapter:osier} details the technical
methods I applied to create a flexible multi-objective optimization framework
called \ac{osier}. Chapter \ref{chapter:benchmark-results} validates \ac{osier}
as an \ac{esom} by comparing its results against an established representative
\ac{esom}. Chapter \ref{chapter:examples} further demonstrates \ac{osier} with
two timely examples related to fuel cycle evaluation and data center
development. Finally, Chapter \ref{chapter:communities} presents and analyzes
the results from the Illinois case studies.

\section{Reproducing this work}
In an effort to adhere to the scientific computing best practices described by
Wilson et al. 2014 \cite{wilson_best_2014}, I produced this document and all of
the analyses herein using the \texttt{snakemake} workflow management tool
\cite{molder_sustainable_2021}. \texttt{Snakemake} facilitates reproducibility,
transparency and adaptability and thus makes following the scientific computing
best practices straightforward. Transparency and reproducbility have been
specifically identified as important by the energy modeling community
\cite{decarolis_formalizing_2017,pfenninger_energy_2014}. Figure
\ref{fig:intro-dag} demonstrates \texttt{snakemake}'s modularity by showing the
workflow \ac{dag} that produces the present chapter. 

\begin{figure}[ht!]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{../analysis/introduction_chapter_dag.png}
    \caption{The \ac{dag} for the ``Introduction'' of this thesis.}
    \label{fig:intro-dag}
\end{figure}

Each \texttt{snakemake} rule is depicted by a unique bubble in Figure
\ref{fig:intro-dag} that represents a single step in the workflow. For example,
\texttt{retrieve\_mauna\_loa\_data} downloads the data from a remote source,
then the data are plotted with \texttt{plot\_mauna\_loa} which produced Figure
\ref{fig:mauna-loa-co2}. In other chapters, complex data processing steps are
separated into their own rules. Following this pattern allows \texttt{snakemake}
to fail gracefully and preserve the output of each successful step, which
eliminates the need to rerun the entire workflow if there is an error. Figure
\ref{fig:dag} shows the full \ac{dag} that builds the entire thesis document.
Lastly, all of the scripts, files, and instructions needed to reproduce this
work are available on the GitHub
platform\footnote{https://github.com/arfc/2025-dotson-dissertation}.

% \newpage \begin{landscape}
    \begin{sidewaysfigure}
        % \begin{figure}[h!]
            \centering
            \includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{../analysis/dag.png}
            \caption{The \ac{dag} illustrating the steps to produce this
            thesis.}
            \label{fig:dag}
        % \end{figure}
    \end{sidewaysfigure}
% \end{landscape}